If you're trying to break into AI
engineering in 2026, or even if you're
trying to level up from where you are
right now, I want to walk you through
five portfolio projects that I think
will genuinely make a difference when
you're sitting in front of a hiring
manager. And I'm not talking about the
kind of projects where you follow a
tutorial, deploy a basic chatbot, and
put it in your resume. I'm talking about
the kind of work that makes someone look
at your GitHub and say, "Okay, this
person actually understands how
production AI systems work." Now I know
the whole portfolio advice space can
feel overwhelming because everyone has
different opinions and it's hard to know
what actually matters versus what's just
noise. So what I have done to help you
is distill this down to five projects
that each target a distinctive in demand
skill and I'm going to walk you through
each one step by step so you know
exactly what to build, what tools to use
and more importantly why each piece
matters. Hi, I'm Ashwarashan. I've spent
over 10 years building and shipping
machine learning and AI systems. I have
a masters in data science from Columbia
University at companies like Microsoft,
Google and IBM and I've led AI developer
relations at Fireworks AI which is one
of the leading AI infrastructure
startups. I've been on both sides of the
hiring table many many times and what
I'm sharing with you today comes
directly from that experience. All
right, so let's dive in. So the first
project that I want you to build is a
production grade retrieval augmented
generation or RAG. Now, if you've been
anywhere near the AI space, you have
definitely heard of this term. And there
is a good reason it keeps coming up. Rag
is genuinely one of the most common
patterns in enterprise AI right now. But
here is what I want you to understand.
The gap between a rag demo and a rag
system that is actually production ready
is enormous. And that gap is exactly
where you can differentiate yourself.
What you're building is essentially a
domainspecific ask my doc system. So you
pick a corpus of documents. It could be
technical documentation, research
papers, legal contracts, healthcare
documents, whatever domain interests
you. And you build a system that
retrieves the right information and
answers questions with proper citations.
The key word here is citations because
anybody can get a large language model
to generate a plausible sounding answer.
But grounding that answer in actual
retrieved evidence is what makes it
trustworthy. I'll highly recommend
breaking into this in three phases. In
the first phase, you're just getting the
fundamentals working. You'll ingest your
documents, whether that is PDF, markdown
files or web pages, and then chunk them
into pieces about 500 to 800 tokens with
roughly say 100 tokens overlap between
the chunks. Now, that overlap matters
because you don't want to accidentally
slice an important sentence right at the
boundary and lose the context. Then
store these chunks as embeddings in a
vector store. You can use Chroma or
Vivvit. Both are excellent choices to
start with. And then you build a
retrieval pipeline that pulls the top k
most relevant chunks for a given query
and generates an answer that cites where
the information came from. At this
stage, your deliverable is
straightforward. You can show someone a
document, show them the answer your
system produced and point them to the
exact paragraph from where it drew it.
The second phase is where you graduate
from a demo to a production quality. And
this is honestly the part that most
people never get to, which is precisely
why it is so valuable. So here you're
going to implement a hybrid retrieval,
which means combining traditional BM25
keyword search with vector-based
semantic search. The reason you want
both is that vector search excels at
understanding meaning and intent. But
sometimes a user is searching for a very
specific term or phrase and BM25 handles
that beautifully. Now on top of that
you'll add a cross encoder re-ranker
which takes your initial set of
retrieved chunks and rescores them using
a model that evaluates the query and
each chunk together as a pair. Now this
consistently and dramatically improves
the precision of your results. You'll
also want to implement citation
enforcement, meaning that the system
should explicitly decline to answer if
retrieved chunks do not actually support
a specific response rather than
hallucinating something that sounds
plausible. And I would say store all of
your prompts in a version config file
because prompts are a part of your
system architecture and treating them
that way shows real engineering
maturity. Now the third phase is what
makes this truly shippable. You're going
to curate a golden evaluation data set
of around 50 to 200 question answer
pairs that you've manually verified for
correctness. Then you'll write an
offline evaluation script that measures
faithfulness which essentially asks the
question are the claims in generated
answer actually supported by the
retrieved chunks. Now wire this into
your continuous integration pipeline so
that every pull request automatically
triggers an evaluation run. And if
quality drops below your threshold, the
build fails. This is exactly how
production AI teams operate. And having
this discipline visible in your
portfolio immediately tells the hiring
manager that you understand the full
life cycle of an AI system. Now for your
text stack I would suggest lang chain or
lang graph for orchestration chromadb or
vvad for your vector store and coher's
reanker or cross encoder models from
sentence transformers for reranking and
ragas for your evaluation framework
since it's specifically designed for
assessing rag systems. Now, the second
project is building a local AI assistant
that runs entirely offline using a small
language model. And I think this one is
more important than a lot of people
realize. You might be wondering why
would you bother running a smaller
language model locally when you can just
call a powerful API like GBT 5. The
answer is that in real world there are
countless scenarios where you cannot or
you shouldn't share the data to an
external service. There are privacy
regulations to consider. There are
latency requirements that rule out
network roundtrips. There are cost
constraints at scale and there are edge
deployment situations where internet
connectivity isn't guaranteed. So
companies care deeply about these
constraints and most candidates have
essentially zero hands-on experience
navigating them. So here is what you'll
do. Start by installing Olama, which is
genuinely the simplest way to get an
open-source model running locally on
your laptop. Pull down a model in
between 3 to 7 billion parameter range.
Whether it's Llama 3.2, 54 or Mistral 7B
are all strong choices and then build
either a command line tool or using a
fast API wrapper around it. The most
important thing in the first phase is
measurement. I want you to rigorously
benchmark your model's inference
performance. Whether it's tokens per
second, time to first token, total
response latency. Write down all this
and include it in your documentation
because these numbers tell a story about
practical trade-offs of local inference.
Now in the second phase, you're going to
add structure and determinism, which is
where this project starts to really get
interesting from an engineering
perspective. You will enforce a JSON
output schema on your model's responses,
validate them with Pyantic, and
implement a retry mechanism that catches
invalid outputs and reprompts once
before failing gracefully. This pattern
of constraint generation plus validation
plus retry is something that you'll
encounter constantly in production
systems and it's remarkably rare to see
in portfolio projects. I would also
encourage you to experiment with the
temperature setting. Run the same set of
prompts at temperature 0 versus 0.7 and
carefully document the variance in
outputs. This demonstrates that you
understand the stochastic nature of a
language model and you know how to
control it when reliability matters. Now
the third phase is model comparison
study and honestly this might be the
most impressive deliverable of the
entire project. So pick three models
let's say llama 3.23b 54 mini and
mistral 7B and benchmark all of them on
the same hardware. Compare the memory
usage, tokens per second, and most
importantly, output quality on a
standardized set of 30 to 50 test
prompts. Write it all in a concise
technical report with actual numbers and
analysis. This is incredibly valuable
for your portfolio because model
selection is a decision that every AI
team has to make regularly. And showing
that you can approach this
systematically with data rather than
just going with whatever is popular on X
or LinkedIn tells a hiring manager that
you think like an engineer. And if you
want to go that extra mile, try
quantized version of these models
whether it's GGUF Q4 or Q5 quantization
and document the quality versus speed
trade-off here. Now that level of rigor
will absolutely make your project stand
out and it'll also help you understand
these basics of AI engineering. Project
3 is something that almost nobody
includes in their portfolio project and
that's precisely why I'm telling you to
do it. Now you're going to take that rag
application that you built in project
one and add a comprehensive monitoring
and observability layer to it. And the
reason this matters so much is something
I really want you to internalize in
production environments. Building the
initial system accounts for maybe 30% of
the work. The remaining 70% is knowing
whether it's working correctly,
understanding why it fails when it does,
and being able to diagnose and fix these
issues quickly. If you can demonstrate
that you can think about systems this
way, you immediately set yourself apart
from the vast majority of candidates who
only know how to build. In the first
phase, you're going to instrument every
step of your rag pipeline with tracing.
That means for every single request that
comes in, you can see exactly which
chunks were retrieved, how the reanker
reordered them, what prompt was sent to
the language model, what the response
was, and how many tokens were consumed.
So tools like Langsmith, Langfuse or
Brain Trust all make this relatively
straightforward to set up. If you're
just getting started, I would
particularly recommend Langfuse because
it's open- source and you can self-host
it, which means that you won't run into
usage issues while you're experimenting
and iterating. Then the second phase is
about tracking quality metrics over
time. And this is where you start
thinking like a site reliability
engineer, but for AI, you want to
measure latency at P50 and P95
percentiles, not just the average
because averages have a nasty habit of
hiding your worst case performance from
you. Then track your cost per request.
So you can actually quantify what each
query costs in dollar terms. Measure the
citation coverage, which is the
percentage of your answers that are
properly grounded in retrieved evidence.
And monitor your failure rate, which
means how often does the system errors
out or produces a response that it
cannot support. The deliverable that
you're aiming for here is that when
somebody asks you what happened when
quality degraded last Tuesday, you can
actually pull up a dashboard, point to
that anomaly, and walk them through the
root cause. Then the third phase
connects everything with regression
gating. Your evaluation data set from
project one now runs automatically as
part of your continuous integration
pipeline. And if the faithfulness or any
other key metric drops below a defined
threshold, the build fails and the
change doesn't get merged. You're also
versioning your prompts and configuring
files right alongside your code because
a prompt change can affect the system
behavior just as dramatically as a code
change. Now, this kind of operational
discipline is exactly what production AI
teams practice every single day. And
seeing something like that in a
portfolio project is genuinely rare and
impressive. Now, I want to be
straightforward with you. This project
won't look as flashy as some AI image
generator or chatbot with a pretty front
end. But this does signal something that
employers value enormously. You think
about systems holistically, not just the
model in the middle. And that system
level thinking is exactly the gap that
most AI teams are desperately trying to
fill right now. Now, the fourth project
is fine-tuning. And I want to set some
right expectation right now because
there's a lot of confusion in the
community about when and why you would
actually fine-tune a model. Now
fine-tuning is not about making a model
generally smarter. It is about making a
model consistently excellent at a
specific well-defined task where even
careful prompting falls short. So before
you fine-tune anything, you need a clear
task where you can credibly demonstrate
the gap. So, here's the best the base
model can do with most carefully
engineered prompt. And here is the
measurable improvement after
fine-tuning. For your task, I would
strongly recommend either structured
JSON extractions from messy unstructured
text or tool call accuracy where the
model needs to select the right function
and populate the correct parameters for
that function. And these are the
problems where fine-tuning provides a
clear quantifiable improvements that you
can present with actual numbers. In the
first phase, you'll do supervised
fine-tuning using Laura. You're going to
start with a clean data set of somewhere
between 2,000 to 10,000 examples. And
I've added some links of these clean
data sets below. I want to really
emphasize on the word clean here because
data quality matters far more than data
quantity. If your training examples are
inconsistent or poorly formatted, you're
essentially teaching the model to be
inconsistent and poorly formatted, which
is obviously counterproductive. Then
I'll say either use Lora or Qura for
parameter efficient finetuning which is
wonderful because it means that you
don't need massive GPU clusters to do
meaningful work. A single A100 or even a
T4 with Qura will get you the job done.
For your base model I would suggest a
quen 38B that should do the job. Then
evaluate on a handout data set with
concrete metrics. things like JSON
validity rate, exact match accuracy, and
refusal correctness, which measures
whether the model properly declines the
answer when it should. Now, the second
phase introduces preference tuning, and
this is where you demonstrate that your
understanding goes beyond the basics.
So, instead of just showing the model
what the correct output looks like,
you're going to show it comparisons. For
the same input prompt, here is a good
output and here is a worse one. And I
want you to learn the difference. You'll
generate multiple outputs per prompt.
Label which ones are better and which
ones are worse and then train using DPO
style preference optimization approach.
Then re-evaluate on your test set and
show the incremental improvement over
your supervised fine-tuning baseline.
This is powerful because it demonstrates
familiarity with modern alignment and
training techniques that are actively
used in the industry today. All the
fine-tuning steps that we're talking
about here are stackable. So they stack
one on top of the other. And for your
tooling, hugging faces's TRL library
handles both SFT and DPU training really
well. Axelatil is another excellent
framework that takes a lot of the
configuration complexities off your
plate. If you need GPU compute without
the hassle of managing cloud
infrastructure, Fireworks AI is a great
platform to use. And here is something
that I would highly encourage you to
include in your project write up. Show
the training curve. Present the before
and after metrics very clearly. and
honestly discuss what went wrong during
the process and how you iterated past
it. Hiring managers genuinely love
seeing that you can troubleshoot and
adapt because that's what actual
day-to-day work looks like. Things are
not going to be perfect and you'll have
to make these adjustments. Now the fifth
and the final project is a realtime
multimodal application and this is your
opportunity to demonstrate that you can
handle the unique challenges of
streaming data, tight latency budgets
and the inherent messiness of systems
that need to respond in real time rather
than in comfort of a batch processing
scenarios. I would suggest picking one
of the three tracks depending on what
excites you the most. So the first
option is a voice assistant where you
can take in the audio input through an
automatic speech recognition, pipe the
transcription through a language model
for reasoning and convert the response
back to speech with texttospech
synthesis. The second option is a
computer vision pipeline where a webcam
field goes into an object detection
model and then a language model reasons
about what's being detected. The third
option is a streaming log analyzer where
you ingest server logs in real time, run
anomaly detection, and have a language
model generate human readable
explanation of what's going wrong. If
you'll ask me which one I would choose,
I would go with the voice assistant
track because voice AI is experiencing
remarkable growth right now and toolings
have matured significantly. You can use
deepgram grammar or whisper for speech
recognition any capable language model
for reasoning layer and lean labs or
cartasia for speech synthesis. Web
soockets work beautifully for
orchestrating the whole pipeline. So now
in the first phase just focus on getting
the streaming pipeline functioning end
to end. You don't have to worry about
the optimization yet. Your goal is to
get data flowing in structure your
events properly and have the language
model responding in real time input.
Getting this to work at all is a
meaningful accomplishment. Now, the
second phase is where you add latency
tracking. And this is honestly the part
that demonstrates most engineering
maturity. You need to decompose your end
toend latency into a detailed budget.
For a voice assistant, that means
separately measuring ASR latency, LLM
time to first token, TTS time to first
bite, and all the overhead in between. I
would say build a visualization that
shows this breakdown for every single
request. Being able to say something
like our total response time is 1.2
seconds and here is exactly how that
breaks down across each component. That
kind of analysis is what makes
interviewers genuinely excited about the
candidate because it shows that you
understand performance engineering. Now
the third phase adds resilience which is
all about what happens when things go
wrong. What does your system do when the
speech recognition service goes down?
What happens when the language model
times out? You need graceful degradation
strategies. Maybe the system falls back
to a simpler response or openly
acknowledges a delay rather than hanging
silently. So I would say implement
timeout handling so nothing blocks
indefinitely and build a replay mode
where you can feed recorded input back
through the pipeline for debugging
purposes. This is how real production
systems are designed and showing that
you've thought carefully about the
failure modes and recovery puts you in a
completely different category than
somebody who only builds in happy path
versions. All right, let me bring all of
this back together. So we spoke about
five different projects. A production
rag system with proper evaluation and
continuous integration gating. A local
model benchmarking application. A
monitoring and observability layer. a
fine-tuning project with measurable
before and after improvements and a
realtime multimodal application with
latency analysis and resilience. Now,
each one targets a different skill set
that companies are actively looking for
right now. And together, they all tell a
cohesive story about who you are as an
AI engineer. As always, I've linked all
the tools, frameworks, and resources
that I've mentioned throughout the video
in the description below. So, definitely
go check that out. And if you found this
video helpful, I would really appreciate
if you would subscribe and hit that bell
icon so you don't miss my upcoming
content. I regularly post about AI and
ML career guidance, free resources, and
learning paths along with technical deep
dives and explainer videos. And I also
share my own journey as an immigrant
building a career as an AI leader here
in the US. If you have any questions and
suggestions of topics that I should
cover in the next video, please do put
that in the comments below. I do read
all of them. Now go build something.